Department of Land Economy
Environment, Law & Economics

Working Paper Series
No. 2018‐04

Title:

Housing Affordability: Is new local supply the key?

Authors:

Bernard Fingletona, Franz Fuerstb and Nikodem Szumiloc

Affiliation:

University of Cambridgea&b, London School of Economics & Political Sciencec

Contact corresponding author:

Franz Fuerst, ff274@cam.ac.uk

Article

Housing affordability:
Is new local supply the key?

Economy and Space
EPA: Economy and Space
2019, Vol. 51(1) 25–50
! The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0308518X18798372
journals.sagepub.com/home/epn

Bernard Fingleton and Franz Fuerst
Department of Land Economy, University of Cambridge, UK

Nikodem Szumilo
Department of Geography and Environment, London School of
Economics and Political Science, UK

Abstract
This paper seeks to predict the impact of future housing supply on the affordability of residential
space in the United Kingdom, using quantitative model-based simulation methods. Our spatially
disaggregated analysis focuses on the greater South East region, approximately within 1.5 hours
commuting time from Central London. A dynamic spatial panel model is applied to account for
observed temporal variations in property prices and housing affordability across districts.
The dynamic structure of this model allows us to assess the scale and extent of knock-on effects
of local supply shocks in one district on other districts in the region. These complex spatial
effects have been largely ignored in local or regional housing market forecasting models to date.
Applying this model, we are able to demonstrate that local house prices and affordability are not
only determined by the underlying supply and demand conditions in the market in question, but
also depend crucially on conditions in neighbouring housing markets whose properties can be
considered close substitutes within a larger regional housing market. We also show that increasing housing supply in the most critical areas has little impact on (both local and regional) affordability, even if wages do not change in response to an increase in employment.
Keywords
Local supply shocks, dynamic spatial panel analysis, housing affordability, house price forecasts

Introduction
Although there is no consensus on the causes of unaffordable housing or even whether its
existence proves that markets are imperfect, the detrimental social and financial impact to
Corresponding author:
Nikodem Szumilo, London School of Economics and Political Science, Department of Geography and Environment,
Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK.
Email: n.szumilo@lse.ac.uk

26

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

the large number of individuals and households negatively affected by it are virtually undisputed. In the USA, government and business leaders struggle to agree on strategies for
combating the issue (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2003), while in the UK, the principal government policy is to increase the supply of housing in key areas to improve affordability.
This simple approach is based on the fundamental assumption that increasing supply will
reduce prices. However, Crook et al. (2010) show that providing new homes in the most
critical areas seems to have little effect on affordability. Although Glaeser et al. (2006) argue
that this may be due to higher wages offered to new residents, we show that even with
exogenous wages new supply has a very small effect on local affordability.
This paper explores how dynamic spatial panel data modelling and simulation methodology can be used to assess the extent to which new housing stock makes housing more
affordable, following the work of Meen et al. (2005) and Fingleton (2008) in particular. The
approach is somewhat different from the complex modelling carried out by Meen et al.
(2005), and more in line with the simpler approach of Fingleton (2008), which allows an
element of theoretical coherence throughout. Although there are alternatives that have been
suggested in the literature, we measure affordability simply as the ratio of house prices to
mean annual wage levels. Other measures include the median house price to median income
ratio, which can be adapted to focus on access to housing by using the lowest quartile house
price to lowest quartile income ratio, or the proportion of households that can only afford
acceptable accommodation with assistance.1 However, the price to wage ratio is easy to
implement and is the measure that has captured the attention of politicians.2 It is also
commonly used to examine the wider impact of housing affordability. For example, there
is an important environmental aspect to the issue of affordability since, if housing is largely
unaffordable where people work, high volumes of commuting are likely to occur
(Sultana, 2002).
The focus of the analysis is the South East of England, where lack of affordability is
probably at its most acute in the UK. This includes Central London, which is the major
centre of employment and also where house prices are the highest in the country. As in many
great cities, daily ebb and flow of commuters from more affordable locations to employment
centres has a costly financial impact on individual households and on local and global
environments (Tse and Chan, 2003). There are also additional macroeconomic and regional
economic issues because relatively low affordability in a core region with a high level of
labour demand will inhibit the inward mobility of labour. Naturally, this leads to
feedback effects between house prices and local economies and other endogenous processes
that simultaneously influence them. Our estimation approach adjusts for using a firstdifference model and instrumenting supply and demand indicators with their lagged
values. We test the validity of our estimates and the contribution of individual factors to
price changes using one-step-ahead predictions. The results show that spatial and temporal
lags are critical to increasing forecasting accuracy.
One of the suggested solutions to housing affordability issues is increasing local supply in
the most problematic areas (Meen et al., 2005). Fundamental economic logic dictates that
increasing supply should reduce prices. However, in the context of complex interaction
effects between commutable areas caused by commuting flow patterns, it is difficult to
easily quantify the impact of new supply on house prices and their affordability. The overall
impact depends not only on income but also on income elasticity of demand in the area
where supply increases. In fact, many studies show that increasing housing supply may
eventually lead to rising demand (Ball et al., 2010; Fingleton, 2008; Szumilo et al., 2017).
The objective of this study is to examine whether new local supplies of dwellings can
improve housing affordability both within the growing location and in the region. To this

Fingleton et al.

27

end, we develop a model of house prices that allows affordability to react differently to
changes in wages and employment. By assuming that wages are exogenous but allowing
employment to depend on housing supply, we show how new housing may lead to lower
affordability. Since allowing workers to travel between districts leads to demand interactions between locations, we also allow for a spatial effect in prices. Our estimation approach
is based on a reduced form equation which allows us to simulate the impact of new supply
on affordability ratios. The advantage of this approach is that, unlike interpreting model
coefficients, it allows one to quantify not only the magnitude but also spatial distribution of
the impact of new supply on affordability. Empirical predictions are made for a hypothetical
increase in housing stock of 5% and 15% in each of London’s 32 boroughs. We also
examine Cheshire’s (2014) suggestion that building 1.6 million houses on London’s greenbelt would make housing more affordable. We analyse two different versions of our empirical predictions, assuming that increased supply either interacts with demand or has no
effect on it. Overall, supply is found to have a much smaller effect on affordability than
expected. Furthermore, it appears that even if supply is increased in all areas by an equal
margin, the impact on prices would not be distributed evenly across space.
The next section reviews different definitions of affordability and the economic significance of the concept. We then summarise our data. The following section presents the
rationale behind the research question and the economic logic that leads to it, after which
we discuss our estimation methods. The final two sections present our empirical predictions
and conclusions.

Defining housing affordability
Despite the fact that its analytical definition has evolved over the last two decades, affordability remains an elusive concept (Stone, 2006). In fact, designing an affordability policy is
hampered by the lack of a commonly accepted definition. Reducing house prices appears to
be a recurring recommendation of many researchers (Bramley, 1994; Hilber and Vermeulen
2016), but measuring the impact of this approach requires a sound definition of affordability
as well as an understanding of the market mechanisms underlying house price formation.

The concept of affordability
The definition of affordability adopted in this article is simply the ratio of house prices to
wages. However, several other metrics have been proposed in the literature. Stone (2006)
alludes to four types of affordability: relative, subjective, budget standards-based and residual income-based. Although they are conceptually very similar, small differences make each
class appropriate for different applications.
Relative affordability refers to changes in the relationship between summary measures of
house prices or costs and household incomes. At its core, this is a form of the price–wage
ratio approach that allows one to focus more on affordability to potential house buyers.
This approach is clearly useful to lenders who focus on transactions, but offers little information about affordability from the perspective of house owners.
Subjective affordability is based on market efficiency and the assumption that all households make rational decisions. In this context, all houses are occupied by people who have
decided that they can afford it. Consequently, it makes little sense to define housing affordability, as in efficient markets all households would sort themselves only into dwellings they
can afford. However, as Stone (2006) points out, there is a considerable difference in
the discretion of income allocation to housing costs versus other costs between high- and

28

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

low-income households. This means that the subjective experience of affordability of housing between the two would differ considerably.
The family budget standards approach to housing affordability is based on an analysis of
different measures of how much of it should be dedicated to housing costs. If a monetary
amount necessary to achieve a certain standard of living is determined (e.g. the poverty
threshold; Bernstein et al. 2000), then the minimum income required to support a household
in a certain area can be established. In the context of housing, this is very similar to the
price–wage ratio approach as the two must stay in a certain relation to each other to ensure
that households are not pushed into poverty. However, while the approach works well for
perishable homogeneous goods, it is difficult to establish universal poverty thresholds for
housing. Even if physical standards could be established, the corresponding monetary
amount would be very difficult to find (see Stone, 2006 for more details).
The residual income approach adopts a slightly different perspective on disposable
income and recognises that housing costs are one of the largest and least flexible items in
household budgets. This means that income adequacy should not be defined by its overall
level but by the amount left after paying for adequate housing. This controls for different
sizes and types of households which, with the same level of disposable income, may require
different amounts for non-shelter goods. Although this may be the most comprehensive
indicator of affordability, its practical application requires defining a standard level of
income that would be considered as adequate for non-housing goods. As this benchmark
is likely to change over space and time, the residual approach cannot be universally applied.
The idea that housing cost should not exceed a certain proportion of household income is
common to all of these metrics. This allows the ratio approach to be a useful metric as the
proportion of the budget taken up by housing costs can be changed by variations in either
(or both) of the two variables. While the residual approach may be the most comprehensive,
the focus of this study is on measuring changes of affordability over time and comparing
them across different locations, rather than against a general benchmark. We do not define
nor rely on defining affordable housing, but use the ratio as its measure to quantify its
relation to other economic variables and responses to policy.

Affordability and policy
In the UK, the government policy is to increase the supply of housing in order to improve
affordability in the greater South East. This appears to be a natural response to rising house
prices and reports of housing shortages (Barker, 2004). With White and Allmendinger
(2003) as well as Whitehead (2007) arguing that housing shortages are a result of strict
planning policies, it appears that the government has a key role to play in resolving the
housing crisis. As Gurran and Whitehead (2011) argue, a new supply of affordable units is a
function of planning regulations, development controls and fees. Since all of those factors
can be affected by policy, it appears that the recipe for increasing housing affordability may
be quite simple. However, despite policy design that supports provision of affordable housing and generous incentives for such developments (Morrison and Monk, 2006), the problem remains unresolved. In fact, Crook et al. (2010) show that existing policies produce a
supply of dwellings that is lower than expected but also that building new homes in the most
critical areas has little effect on affordability.
More recent studies indicate that simply increasing supply may not be sufficient to reduce
prices. Fingleton (2008) notes that both supply and demand factors need to be considered
when trying to design policies that affect house prices. If the increase in the supply of
housing is accompanied by expansion of employment, there might be a feedback effect

Fingleton et al.

29

on demand for residential properties. This resonates with the argument presented by other
researchers (Glaeser et al., 2006; Szumilo et al., 2017), who note a reciprocal relationship
between city size, productivity and income. Gurran and Whitehead (2011) also argue that
supply-focused policies may be misguided and that demand also needs to be addressed.
The key concept is that under certain conditions expansion of supply can increase
demand and lead to higher prices (Nelson et al., 2002).

Measuring housing affordability
The previous section showed that an analysis using a simplistic definition of affordability is
likely to yield misleading results due to the large variations in building stock, regional wealth
and endowment with local amenities and production factors that are reflected in house
prices. Therefore, a conceptual framework is required that takes these factors into account.
An obvious starting point is the quintessential urban economics models of urban house price
determinants, the Alonso–Muth–Mills model, which assumes that locations closer to an
urban and/or major employment centre are more attractive due to greater accessibility
and shorter commutes, and will hence command higher land and house prices.
Households maximise their utility by trading off the accessibility and other amenities of a
given location with the cost of housing and transportation. The cost of housing is assumed
to fall linearly as transport costs increase with distance to the centre, which means that the
sum of these two key costs is assumed to remain constant across space. However, households, particularly those with higher incomes, are able to gain higher utility by consuming
more floor space on larger parcels of land in more peripheral locations, which may more
than offset the additional cost of longer commutes and travel times. While the Alonso–
Muth–Mills model explains the general price distribution within a city, it fails to explain
price differentials across cities. To this end, Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) incorporate the
role of wages and rents in household location choices. In the Rosen–Roback model, prices
reflect wage levels and/or the aggregate value of amenities across cities. Roback’s empirical
analysis infers the implicit willingness to pay for location amenities by comparing wages net
of housing costs across cities, and finds that workers accept lower real wages in areas with a
high level of amenities. This finding was also confirmed for the UK housing market by
Gibbons et al. (2011, 2014).

Fundamental determinants of house prices
Glaeser et al. (2006) demonstrate that new supply plays a crucial role in determining whether
productivity increases will lead to urban expansion or just to more expensive homes and
higher wages. The former is shown to occur in places with low regulation and low density,
while the latter is associated with cities marked by high density and strict planning regulations. Where housing supply is extremely inelastic, population size remains constant and
wages increase to offset the accompanying rise in house prices following an increase in
demand. However, these constraints can be partially circumvented by longer commutes
from areas with more elastic supply and by pricing out and replacing existing low-skilled
residents by highly skilled, more productive incoming workers. This is not undisputed,
however, as Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2006) demonstrate that established long-term homeowners typically remain in a neighbourhood even if they could afford a larger property
elsewhere following sharp house price increases in their neighbourhood. Competition for
available properties is then restricted to highly skilled affluent newcomers. By contrast,

30

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

pricing-out may occur where households are mainly renters and not protected by strict
regulations on rent increases.
Differences between short- and long-run house price determinants are also expounded
in the literature. For example, MacDonald and Taylor (1993) explore the long-run relationships between house prices in the UK and then work out potential ripple effects and shortterm dynamics. More recently, Gallin (2006) investigated the long-run relationship between
house prices and income and did not find a significant association. Generally, long-term
house price determinants include demographic trends, household size, household income,
taxation of homeownership as well as transportation cost and technology, while shortterm factors include unemployment, interest rates, access to mortgage debt and the financial
performance of competing asset classes (Malpezzi, 1999; Meen, 2002; Weiner and
Fuerst, 2017).
Inelastic supply of housing has been shown theoretically and empirically to inflate house
prices in the presence of rising demand. This may lead to house prices growing faster than
wages, thereby eroding affordability. While this outcome is not desirable from a policy and
household purchasing power point of view, it could be argued that if increased demand for
housing is correlated with growing demand for labour, the local economy still benefits from
lower unemployment rates and higher wages. While the benefit of higher earnings would be
offset partially or completely by the inflation of house prices, higher employment is expected
to persist. This would also be true at a national level, assuming that the size of the labour
force is constant. In that case, if a growing economy wanted to sustain its development by
increasing its total employment, it would have no choice but to hire and train previously
unemployed workers (Aslund and Rooth, 2007). However, at a regional level, the size of
the labour force could evolve as the transport infrastructure changes. Given satisfactory
transportation links, the labour force would not be constant despite the fact that local
population in the centre of employment may remain unchanged and limited by an inelastic
supply of housing (Haynes, 1997). This shows that when analysing a particular housing
market, its interaction with commutable areas also needs to be examined. Hence, the current
study can be seen as an extension of the work presented by Glaeser et al. (2006), who
assume that there is no cross-area commuting and model house prices based on withinarea supply and demand. However, the present analysis relaxes the assumption that demand
is only driven by local employment by also taking moving and commuting across areas
into account.

Modelling the interaction between housing and labour markets
Workers who purchase or rent homes in expensive locations would be those with the highest
utility derived from doing so. For example, senior workers whose opportunity cost of commuting is high could be more likely to live close to their workplace (Bissell, 2014; Eliasson
et al., 2003). In a competitive bidding process, prices would increase and houses would be
more likely to be occupied by those who derive higher utility from living close to the centre.
However, it is also important to consider that those who have the ability to pay more are
likely to outbid those whose maximum price is constrained not by their utility but by their
wage (Sa, 2015). Consequently, house prices in any district are likely to be determined by
wages offered to those who work there and the number of workers competing for housing in
the location. While not everyone may prefer to live close to their workplace, those with
higher wages can afford to pay higher prices in exchange for a less onerous commute.
If income (I) in area i at time t is defined by the Hadamard (cell-by-cell) product of the
 t and number of employees working in
N  1 vector of mean employee mean wage rate w

Fingleton et al.

31

 it 8Eit , then its growth can be driven by changes in either of
each district Et , hence Iit ¼ w
those values. However, they are likely to have different effects on the affordability ratio
defined as wpitit (where p is price). If residential demand (qit ) is driven primarily by changes in
income, qit ¼ fðpit ; Iit Þ, then as income grows, house prices increase accordingly (Goodman,
1988). However, the impact of this process on the affordability ratio depends on whether the
higher income is driven by employment or wages. While both can impact prices through
demand, only wages can induce a corresponding change in the affordability ratio. In this
light, an expansion of housing supply can be seen as an increase in the number of local
workers. This will increase income and house prices unless it is accompanied by a reduction
in average wage levels. Glaeser et al. (2006) present this process by introducing a wage
model that assumes that agglomeration benefits have a positive effect, while a negative
reaction is caused by the increasing labour supply. We adopt a simpler approach in
which we do not allow wages to be a function of the local labour force, but assume that
they are set exogenously for each district. This focuses our study on the housing demand
created by the increase in employment levels and ignores the impact of additional density on
wages. Omitting the density effect simplifies our analysis and assumes that the impact of new
housing supply on demand is lower by ignoring one of the channels of its transmission.
According to Fingleton (2008), doubling employment density in UK districts increases
wages by 2.8%. This effect is unlikely to have a significant impact on our analysis as the
highest changes in employment density in our simulation will not exceed 50%, so changes in
wages will be very small. Moreover, if this assumption has any effect on our estimates it
would be a small downward bias in the impact of new supply on prices. In our set-up, new
housing supply increases income by allowing more workers (rather than higher wages). In
turn, this is likely to lead to a higher housing demand. Ultimately, the impact of new supply
on affordability will depend on income elasticity of demand and supply elasticities of both
income and price.
While a similar process has been shown by Glaeser et al. (2006), their work has explicitly
ignored any interactions between locations. If the demand for housing from residents of any
district is allowed to depend on income earned by residents commuting to jobs located
within commuting distance of that district, it becomes necessary to consider how this interaction may affect the impact of supply increases on prices. In other words, the jobs that
determine local income are not local but distributed across commutable areas (Mulalic et al.,
2014). This means that the impact of increasing local supply in district i will be affected by
demand generated by commutable jobs, which we denote by Icit , which is income within
commuting distance. We also include a spatial price-dependence element ðWN pÞ and two
district-invariant variables in the demand function, Bt and Ft , which becomes
qit ¼ fðpit ; Icit ; WN pit ; Bt ; Ft Þ. This reflects the fact that demand for property qit depends not
only on local prices and income within commuting distance, but on prices in ‘nearby’
districts, where ‘nearby’ means within commuting range, and on the Bank of England
interest rate Bt and the FTSE ALL SHARES index of share prices, Ft .3 In order to calculate
the mean bank interest rate for each year, we take the mean of the rates applying in each
month of the year. The bank interest rate is proposed to capture the effect on demand of
(closely related) mortgage interest rates. It also reflects returns on investments held as bank
deposits, as an alternative to property investment. The mean FTSE ALL SHARES index is
similarly meant to capture competing investment opportunities. Its annual value is calculated as the average level of monthly closing values of the index, as reported by Bloomberg.
We assume that prices will be correlated contemporaneously across space. That means
that prices will tend to be related in districts that are close together in space as well as in
time. For example, two identical properties on either side of a street would undoubtedly see

32

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

a convergence in price because of comparison effects. We can think of this as a displaced
demand effect, whereby an initially more expensive property would displace demand to a
closely comparable property, thus lowering the price of one and raising the price of the other
until an equilibrium is reached. We envisage a similar process operating at the district level,
where, having controlled for other factors affecting prices, including inter-district heterogeneity, there will be a tendency for prices to converge in locations where price comparisons
are being made. Critically, however, we assume that those comparisons will be made based
on commuting possibilities between zones as workers from each district affect the demand in
its commutable areas.
Introducing this regional price interaction between commutable areas needs to be put in
the context of the imperfections of both real estate and labour markets that determine it.
Both markets are characterised by long search times, sticky prices and high transaction costs
(Lambson et al., 2004). This results in changes occurring slowly and current prices being
highly dependent on their historical values. One way to visualise this is as an imperfection in
the market, so that the full effect of a change in price is not felt immediately. One might
imagine that the full effect of rising prices will be moderated by institutional rigidities in the
housing market, so that consumers already locked into the purchasing process will maintain
their demand despite a price shock because of the costs of withdrawal due to commitments
already entered into. Similarly, a delayed response to rising prices may be the outcome of
imperfect knowledge of substitutes – for example, there will be a cost of acquiring knowledge of, and access to, the rental market. We assume that the effect of a price adjustment is
distributed over two years rather than being instantaneous. Including lagged prices in both
supply and demand is consistent with the work of Meen (2005) and Holly et al. (2011) for
the UK, and with the approach of Iacoviello (2005) for the USA. While this spatial dependency necessitates including a temporal lag factor (Pit1 ) into the demand equation, it
presents an interesting problem in the light of the spatial correlation in house prices. If
district-specific demand effects are distributed over two time periods, then their spatial
effects should not be assumed to occur instantly but to follow the same temporal process.
It appears that a temporal lag of the spatial lag (WPit1 ) also needs to be included in the
model to control for this process. Baltagi et al. (2018) show that this term with a negative
coefficient, as in Table 2, is a concomitant feature of an equilibrium process.
There are also potentially additional unmeasured effects, such as demand coming from
non-wage earners, local taxes and amenities and the likely returns from investing in a
neighbourhood.4 These unmeasured effects, accounting for time-constant across-district
heterogeneity together with additional transient effects, are represented in our model by
random disturbances, xit . Finally, for each of the districts included in our analysis, the
proposed demand function can be formalised as:
qit ¼ fð pit ; pit1 ; Icit ; WN pit ; Bt ; Ft ; WN pit1 ; xit Þ
where qit is the demand for housing in district i (i ¼ 1,. . .,N) at time t; Icit is income within
commuting distance; pit and pit1 are prices and prices lagged by one year; WN pit is the
spatial lag of prices; Bt and Ft are the bank rate and FTSE share index respectively; WN pit1
is the spatial lag of the temporal lag of prices; and xit represents other unmeasurable factors.
To obtain Icit we commence with income by district, Iit , thus:
 it 8Eit
Iit ¼ w

Fingleton et al.

33

which gives
Icit ¼

N
X

C~ ik Ikt

k¼1

where C~ is an N  N matrix in which row i (i ¼ 1,. . .,N) contains the proportions of commuters travelling from district i to work in each of the N districts.5
We assume that price comparisons will involve districts with similar locations with
respect to the location of employment, and we measure this similarity using an N  N
proximity matrix, WN . The effect of proximate prices is captured in the model by the
vector WN pt , which is the matrix product of WN and the price vector pt , thus:
WN pit ¼

N
X

wik pkt

k¼1

Since large inter-district commuting flows are a good indicator of close proximity, the
matrix WN is taken to be the same as the weighting matrix used to give Ict , except that the
leading diagonal cells are set to zero prior to standardisation.6 Accordingly, cell i of vector
WN pt is a weighted average of districts in the vicinity of i, with weights determined by
proximity as given by inter-district commuting frequencies. Moreover, because of market
imperfections there is also an effect of proximate prices in the previous period, hence we
include WN pt1 in the specification.
We assume a linear demand function, with negative coefficients on price, except on the
spatial lags of price where the displaced demand would tend to a negative relationship.
However, in our reduced form this is not identified so we do not explicitly test this hypothesis. We also anticipate that a higher bank rate with correspondingly higher mortgage rates
and higher returns from savings will be associated with lower demand, and similarly a higher
FTSE index indicates lower demand for housing, with investment attracted to higher returns
in stocks and shares than property:
qit ¼ a1 Icit  a2 pit  a3 pit1 þ a4 WN pit  a5 Bt  a6 Ft þ a7 WN pit1 þ xit

(1)

On the supply side, the variables are the same, except that we substitute the stock of
dwellings (Sit ) for income within commuting distance, and there are different assumptions
about the signs on the coefficients. This is apparent from equation (2):
qit ¼ fð pit ; pit1 ; Sit ; WN pit ; Bt ; Ft ; WN pit1 ; 1it Þ
qit ¼ b1 pit þ b2 pit1 þ b3 Sit  b4 WN pit  b5 Ft  b6 Ft  b7 WN pit1 þ 1it

(2)

Thus, the quantity supplied increases with price and lagged price, with an assumption
that development and selling will be stimulated by rising prices. The presence of the lagged
prices is again a reflection of presumed market imperfection, with a positive price shock
taking time to create a supply response due to institutional factors and the time and
finance required to respond to the price signal. Supply is also assumed to be a positive
function of the stock of dwellings in each district, with districts with a large dwelling stock
(the larger towns) naturally being associated with a large supply of properties on the market

34

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

irrespective of prices. Also, we assume that supply will be lower if money is held as savings
and investments, and mortgages to finance development are expensive, hence the negative
signs on Bt and Ft . As with the demand function, we also include spatial lags WN pt and
WN pt1 to reflect a similar process of proximate price comparison, in this case involving
developers and sellers. For example, if prices are higher on one side of a street of identical
properties, the residents and builders are more likely to place properties on the market, thus
increasing supply and reducing selling prices. On the other side of the street, reluctance to
place properties on the market until prices rise will inhibit supply and cause prices to rise,
until eventually we reach an equilibrium. Likewise, at the district level, high prices in nearby
districts will, ceteris paribus, tend to be negatively related to the quantity supplied in district i
on an assumption that high prices ‘nearby’ encourage developers and builders who would
otherwise increase the supply in district i to prefer to build or renovate in nearby districts,
and householders in district i will be reluctant to put their properties on the market until
prices rise to the level in surrounding districts. We refer to this as a displaced supply effect.
This rationale is reflected in the negative coefficients on the spatial lags WN pt and WN pt1 in
the supply function. For simplicity, WN is the same as in the demand equation. The disturbances 1t again capture unmeasured effects such as inter-district heterogeneity.

Data and preliminary analysis
The essential departure in this paper, compared with the purely cross-sectional approach of
Fingleton (2008), is an emphasis on dynamics. To set the scene, let us look at wage and price
data for the years 1998 and 2012, which is the period over which we estimate our model.
Figure 1 gives a snapshot of the price to average wage ratio at the beginning and end of our
estimation period. The data are taken from the UK’s Office of National Statistics and the
Land Registry, and are means in each unitary authority and local authority district (hereafter referred to as districts) taken across all types of property sale prices and all employees
at places of work. Districts are used because their internal housing markets are relatively
uniform; these are divided into four different types (London boroughs, non-metropolitan
districts, metropolitan districts and unitary authorities) based on their geography and population. Since each is governed by its own local authority, planning and housing policies are
similar within those areas but differ across them. These are also the smallest geographical
units for which data on wages are available. Naturally, because the areas are quite small (see
Table 1) there is a large amount of cross-commuting, especially in the Greater London area.
Controlling for this effect is the cornerstone of this paper, and commuting data from the
2001 Census are used to model the relationship between places of work and residence. This
allows us to reflect in the empirical analysis the fact that labour markets span multiple districts.
From Figure 1, we can see that the price–wage ratio increased quite dramatically over the
period, indicating falling affordability.7

Model specification
This section describes the reduced form giving the econometric model specification and gives
a brief outline of the estimation methodology leading to the estimates given later in Table 2.
These are the basis of the simulation results given later in the paper.
It is easy to show that having normalised the supply function with respect to pit , that is,
rearranging equation (1) with price on the left-hand side, and then substituting for qit using

Fingleton et al.

35

Figure 1. House price to annual wage ratio in 1998 (top) and 2012 (bottom), England.
Key: vertical scale: number of districts; horizontal scale: price to annual wage ratio. Shades on the map and
the histogram correspond to the same price to annual wage ratio. The histogram indicates the affordability
ratio corresponding to a specific colour and presents the frequency of this ratio, while the map shows the
spatial distribution.

the demand function of equation (2), the reduced form is
pit ¼ cpit1 þ q1

N
X

N
X
wik pkt þ b1 Icit þ b2 Sit þ b3 Bt þ b4 Ft þ h
wik pkt1 þ eit

k¼1

i ¼ 1; . . .; N; t ¼ 2; . . .; T

k¼1

(3)

36

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

Table 1. Summary statistics and differences between districts over time.
House prices

Affordability

Wages

Population

Density

Average SD

Average SD

Average SD

Average SD

Average SD

2008
London borough
296,881
Metropolitan district 130,330
Non-metro
193,004
Unitary authority
164,932
2012
London borough
323,533
Metropolitan district 123,090
Non-metro
190,390
Unitary authority
160,985

7733
18,923
52,828
48,724

9.12
5.49
7.30
6.46

1.72 593.1
0.51 438.4
1.48 486.9
1.34 467.8

80.4 243,906
30.2 312,408
68.5 104,320
66.9 187,262

51,485 66.86
174,472 20.06
28,994 7.16
68,241 18.47

33.76
9.75
8.62
15.52

133,285 9.40
20,862 4.88
58,938 6.77
51,646 5.99

2.71 623.3
0.53 465.7
1.50 514.8
1.35 491.1

70.6 259,406
35.3 320,878
71.1 106,957
66.8 193,394

56,594 71.03
182,937 20.59
30,230 7.38
71,712 19.18

35.83
10.25
8.97
16.30

SD, standard deviation

Table 2. GMM-SL-SAR-RE estimates of the dynamic spatial panel model.
Parameter

Estimate

Standard error

t ratio

c
q1
b1
b2
b3
b4
h
q2
r2l
r2

0.9518
0.583
270.3
–0.9701
–1.687
–4.016
–0.585
0.4555
3.6806
2.1518

0.001283
0.004454
6.663
0.02689
0.02743
0.06409
0.004215

742.1
130.9
40.57
–36.08
–61.5
–62.67
–138.8

Notes: Standard errors for estimates of q2 , r2 and r2l are not provided by our estimator and
therefore are not reported in this table. The influence of q2 on the model can, however, be
inferred from the results of one-step-ahead predictions reported below.

We also include random effects li taking account of inter-district heterogeneity, and
transient effects  it picking up spatially and temporally varying shocks, and assume that
the disturbances comprise an autoregressive spatial dependence process with the same
weights matrix as the spatial lags in equation (3), but with parameter q2 :
eit ¼ q2

N
X

mik ekt þ uit

k¼1

et ¼ ðIN  q2 WN Þ  1ut ¼ H1
N ut
uit ¼ li þ  it
MN ¼ WN an N  N matrix of known spatial weights
IN is an N  N identity matrix
li  iidð0; r2l Þ the individual  specific time  invariant effect
 it  iidð0; r2 Þ the remainder effect
covðli ;  it Þ ¼ 0

(4)

Fingleton et al.

37

Baltagi et al. (2014) develop an estimator, with the acronym GMM-SL-SAR-RE,8 for an
equivalent dynamic spatial panel model with autoregressive spatial disturbances but with h
restricted to zero, which is based on the work of Arellano and Bond (1991) and Mutl (2006),
and on the spatial method of moments (GM) estimator proposed by Kapoor et al. (2007).
Baltagi et al. (2018) introduce an estimator based on this approach but with h not restricted
to zero, which differs from our estimator in that it assumes a spatial moving average error
process for the disturbances. This is the basis of the estimator employed in this paper.
We omit much technical detail, but the basic idea is to include both non-spatial and spatial
instruments in the estimator to obtain consistent estimates of the parameters. Monte Carlo
simulations carried out by Baltagi et al. (2014, 2018) show that for a data-generating process
with these characteristics, GMM-SL-SAR-RE is superior to OLS, which ignores the endogeneity of the spatial and temporal lags, the existence of individual effects li and the spatial
dependence in the disturbances. Likewise, it is preferable to the within- or fixed-effects
estimator, which does take care of li , but which also does not deal with the endogeneity
of the lags or the spatial dependence in the disturbances. Also, the original Arellano and
Bond (1991) GMM estimator ignores the spatial process in the disturbances, while the
estimator of Mutl (2006) does not include the spatial lag, so these also perform less well
than GMM-SL-SAR-RE.
To summarise, following Arellano and Bond (1991) and Baltagi et al. (2014, 2018), we
eliminate the individual effects li , which are correlated with the spatial lag and temporal lags
of the dependent variable, by first differencing the model. Next, again following this literature, moments conditions are created on the basis of an assumption of no correlation
between first-differenced disturbances and time-lagged levels of variables. As explained by
Bond (2002), the extent of lagging depends on whether variables are considered exogenous,
predetermined or endogenous. In this particular application, the variables Ict and St are
assumed to be predetermined, which means they are contemporaneously uncorrelated
with the  it , but may be correlated with the  it1 and earlier shocks. We therefore assume
that prices may feed back and affect income and supply, but this effect is not instantaneous.
Following Bond (2002), these predetermined variables are lagged by one period in the
construction of moments equations so as to eliminate correlation between the instruments
at time t  1 and earlier and D it . Likewise, the spatial lags of these variables are also lagged
by one period to give an enhanced set of moments equations. Using these instruments in a
spatial GM estimator, we obtain consistent estimates of c; q1 ; b1 ; b2 ; b3 ; b4 ; h. The firstdifferenced residuals provided allow estimation, using non-linear least squares to solve
the sample moments, of q2 ; r2 ; r2l based on Kapoor et al. (2007). Finally, again following
Arellano and Bond (1991) and Baltagi et al. (2014, 2018), we obtain final estimates of
c; q1 ; b1 ; b2 ; b3 ; b4 ; h via a two-step spatial GM estimator. We omit technical detail of the
robustness of these estimates, which is available from Baltagi et al. (2014, 2018).

Results
Model estimates
We estimate the model using data for the period 1998–2011, thus omitting the most recent
observations for 2015, which are retained to enable one-step ahead predictions. Table 2 gives
the resulting parameter estimates, standard errors and t ratios, indicting highly significant
temporal and spatial lags, a very strong positive relationship between price and income
within commuting distance, and a strong negative relationship between the stock of dwellings and price. There is also positive spatial dependence among the disturbances, but the

38

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

individual heterogeneity (as measured by the estimated r2l ) is comparatively large compared
to the variance of the transient effects ð^
r 2 Þ. According to Elhorst (2001:131), Parent and
LeSage (2011: 478, 2012: 731) and Debarsy et al. (2012: 162), the dynamic stability and
stationarity of the model requires that
c þ ðq1 þ hÞemax < 1
c þ ðq1 þ hÞemin < 1

if
if

q1 þ h  0
q1 þ h < 0

c  ðq1  hÞemax > 1
c  ðq1  hÞemin > 1

if
if

q1  h  0
q1  h < 0

(5)

in which e is a vector of eigenvalues of WN . Given emax ¼ 1 and emin ¼ 0:001 and using the
parameter estimates in Table 2, we conclude that the model is stationary.
The one-step-ahead predictions for 2012 were obtained following Chamberlain (1984),
Sevestre and Trognon (1996) and Baltagi et al. (2014), who proposed a linear predictor of
equation (3) under the assumption that h ¼ 0. But this also depends on a process that
generates initial values that could be impracticable. In this section we give an alternative
predictor for the case in which h 6¼ 0 and which does not depend on the generation of
unobserved initial values p0 . Following Baltagi et al. (2018), but in the context of spatial
autoregressive errors, as a first step we obtain estimates of the individual effects li from the
residuals averaged over time. Thus, we commence with the equation (3) specification written thus:
pt ¼ q1 WN pt þ b1 Ict þ b2 St þ b3 Bt þ b4 Ft þ CN pt1 þ et
CN ¼ ðcIN þ hWN Þ

(6)

in which q1 ; c; b1 ; b2 ; b3 ; b4 and h are scalar parameters and IN is an N  N identity matrix.
Given the SAR error process based on scalar parameter q2 and thus HN ¼ ðIN  q2 WN Þ,
this leads to
c
et ¼ H1
N ut ¼ pt  q1 WN pt  CN pt1  b1 It  b2 St  b3 Bt  b4 Ft

(7)

ut ¼ l þ  t ¼ HN ðpt  q1 WN pt  CN pt1  b1 Ict  b2 St  b3 Bt  b4 FÞ
l ¼ HN ðpt  q1 WN pt  CN pt1  b1 Ict  b2 St  b3 Bt  b4 FÞ   t

(8)

so that

^ by using the N  1 observed price series pt together with Ict , St , Bt ; Ft and
We obtain l
^ ;b
^ ;b
^ ;b
^ ;q
^ 1 ; ^c ; ^
^ 2 Þ
q
h; b
1
2
3
4 ^ 2 , as given in Table 2, and drawing an N  1 vector  t from the Nð0; r
^ for each of t ¼ 2; . . .T. We take the time mean of these T  1 different
distribution to give l
estimates, over the years 1998–2011, to give an estimate of the time-constant N  1 vector l.
.
We denote this estimate by l
^ ;
^ 1 ; ^c ; ^h; b
 , we obtain a price prediction for 2012 using the estimates q
Given l
1
^ ;b
^ ;q
^ ;b
^
obtained
from
data
for
the
period
up
to
2011
combined
with
the
observations
b
2
3
4
2
on the explanatory variables for s ¼ 2012, thus ensuring that the parameter estimates are
independent of the 2012 data and providing a valid method for testing the predictive ability

Fingleton et al.

39

Figure 2. One-step-ahead predictions.

of the model. Therefore, predictions are obtained using the prediction equation
h
i
1
1
c
^
^
^
^
^
^
^

p^s ¼ B N C N ps1 þ b 1 Is þ b 2 Ss þ b 3 Bs þ b 4 Fs þ H N l
1
^ 1 WN Þ1
B^N ¼ ðIN  q


C^ ¼ ^c IN þ ^hWN

(9)

N
^ 1 ¼ ðIN  q
^ 2 WN Þ1
H
N

The predicted and actual prices for 2012 for each of N ¼ 353 districts are given in
Figure 2, and this indicates that the model works quite well for most districts.
A measure of the relative predictive ability of the model versus various sub-models in
which various parameters are restricted to zero is given by the root mean square error
(RMSE), where

RMSE ¼

sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
XN
ðp^s  ps Þ2
i¼1
N

(10)

Table 3 shows the loss of fit relative to the predictions given by the full model that occurs
when the various model parameters are constrained to zero. An RMSE value similar to that
for the full model would indicate that a given restriction was acceptable and make no
difference to the predictive performance of the model. However, we find that the RMSEs
reflect what is shown by the t ratios in Table 2. While the estimator does not provide a t ratio
for q2 , interestingly, assuming no spatial dependence in the errors (q2 ¼ 0) produces a larger
RMSE than nullifying the effect of demand variation.

Simulation methodology
The motivation for our simulation is to try to quantify what effect a localised autonomous
increase in the supply of dwellings would have on local and regional house prices and

40

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

Table 3. RMSEs for one-step-ahead predictions given by prediction equation (9) and sub-models.
Full model

q1 ¼ 0

c¼0

h¼0

b1 ¼ 0

b2 ¼ 0

q2 ¼ 0

b3 ¼ 0

b4 ¼ 0

17.4213

168.8065

641.2378

445.7474

58.7971

201.8032

93.0538

203.7190

230.2032

affordability. The approach adopted is to use the parameter estimates given in Table 2 to
generate ‘what if’ scenarios – in other words, house prices under an assumption that the
number of dwellings was much larger than actually observed in specific locations.9 The very
small standard errors of the estimated model mean that within the range of variation this
allows, the variation in simulation outcome is likely to be small:
h
i
1
^ ðIc þ DIc Þ þ b
^ ðSs þ DSs Þ þ b
^ Bs þ b
^ Fs þ H
^ 1 l

p^s ¼ B^N C^ N ps1 þ b
1 s
2
3
4
s
N

(11)

To obtain the counterfactual price for the year s ¼ 2012 (for which we have data),
counterfactual values for demand and/or supply are utilised, as denoted by Ics þ DIcs and
Ss þ DSs . Also the 2012 mean bank rate and FTSE index are used for Bs and Fs . Initially,
the level of housing supply in each London borough was incremented by 5%, and then by
15%. We also explore the ramifications for prices and affordability on the basis of 1.6
million more homes across Greater London, which on our estimation is an increment of
approximately 48% in the stock of homes. Counterfactual price series were obtained on the
assumption that there was no concomitant increase in the demand for housing, so that DIcs ¼
0 across all districts and DSs ¼ 0 outside of Greater London. Elsewhere, within Greater
London, DSis ¼ 0:05Sis and alternatively DSis ¼ 0:15Sis .
In addition, we make the assumption that a higher level of supply would entail higherlevel demand as more workers occupy the additional accommodation. In our estimation of
the counterfactual level of demand in 2012, we simply utilise wages at their 2012 levels.
To obtain the change in income within commuting distance DIcis , we use essentially the same
method used for Icit , as described earlier. Thus, we need to estimate the increase in income by
district, DIis , which is approximated by the Hadamard product of the N  1 vector of mean
 s and the increase in the number of employees working in each district
employee wage rate w
DEs . To obtain the increase in employment level DEs , we calculate the ratio of the total
number of workers in England to the total number of dwellings, thus eliminating the effects
of commuting. The employment increase DEs is equal to the increase in number of dwellings
DSs multiplied by this ratio, which is equal to zero for all but the London boroughs. Thus,
 is 8DEis
DIis ¼ w

(12)

and this gives
DIcis ¼

N
X

C~ ik DIks

(13)

k¼1

Simulation results
Figure 3 shows the impact, as given by equation (8), of a hypothetical step increment of 5%
in the number of dwellings in each London borough (plus the City of London) on its 2012

Fingleton et al.

41

Figure 3. Impact of 5% increase in supply on London house prices.
Note districts are ranked according to the strength of the impact.

Figure 4. Effect of a 5% increase in the London supply of housing: (a) England; (b) South East England.
Key: vertical scale: number of districts; horizontal scale: price to annual wage ratio. Shades on the map and
the histogram correspond to the same price change.

level. To interpret Figure 3, districts across the whole of England have been sorted according
to the strength of the impact on price.
This shows that within Greater London the extra supply of housing produces a fall in
price of between about £4000 and £12,000. Many other areas of England see prices fall by
less than £4000, but this is in response to an increase in supply confined to Greater London.
This is also illustrated by the Figure 4(a) histogram, which gives the distribution of price
impacts across all English districts. The Figure 4(b) map focuses on price changes in the
South East of England, centred on London, which sees the greatest impact. The darkest
shading highlights the London boroughs, but spillover effects are also felt outside the area
actually receiving the supply-side stimulus.
The simulations described in Figure 4 assume that an increase in supply occurs without
any concomitant increase in demand. However, demand may change due to the increase in

42

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

Figure 5. Effect of demand increase due to a 5% increase in the London supply of housing: (a) England; (b)
South East England.
Key: vertical scale: number of districts; horizontal scale: price to annual wage ratio. Shades on the map and
the histogram correspond to the same price change.

Figure 6. Net effect of 5% increased supply and increased demand: (a) England; (b) South East England.
Key: vertical scale: number of districts; horizontal scale: price to annual wage ratio. Shades on the map and
the histogram correspond to the same price change.

the number of dwellings generating an increase in the labour force and therefore income.
Figure 5 shows the increase in price due to the induced increase in demand. Prices would rise
by about £2500 in Inner London. Figure 6 gives the net outcome of the negative supply
effect plus the positive demand effect, showing that prices fall by about £4000 to £10,000 in
the London boroughs, with spillover causing price reductions outside London. Of the 353
English districts, more than 200 do not see any price effect as a result of the increased supply

Fingleton et al.

43

Table 4. Actual prices and affordability in 2012.
Price (£)

Greater London
England

Affordability

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

438,960
230,560

379,610
208,170

11.70
7.53

9.45
7.00

Table 5. The effects on prices and affordability in 2012 of a hypothetical 5% increase in supply.

Both supply and demand effects
Greater London
England
Supply effects only
Greater London
England

Counterfactual price

Counterfactual affordability

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

431,329
229,272

372,004
206,688

11.49
7.50

9.23
6.89

428,745
228,711

369,197
205,886

11.42
7.48

9.16
6.88

Notes: with supply effects only, counterfactual price series were obtained on the assumption that there was no concomitant increase in the demand for housing, so that DIcs ¼ 0 across all districts and DSs ¼ 0 outside of Greater London.
Elsewhere, within Greater London, DSis ¼ 0:05Sis .

of dwellings in London. Tables 4 and 5 give quantitative details. While price reductions
would be the outcome of a 5% increase in supply, the small scale of the effect would make
hardly any difference to affordability.
In order to obtain a greater impact, we increase the existing supply of dwellings by 15%.
The resulting figures are similar to Figures 4–6, so we omit these to save space. The greater
increase in supply would cause prices to fall by approximately £30,000 in the London
boroughs, but with the spillover effect causing price reduction elsewhere in the South
East of England and beyond. Again, assuming that increased numbers of dwellings has a
concomitant effect on the number of workers and hence demand, prices would increase by
about £8000 in the Inner London boroughs, with the net effect being a price fall of about
£22,000 in the London boroughs, with smaller reductions outside Greater London.
The summary of effects in Table 6 indicates that a 15% increase in supply in Greater
London does make housing more affordable, but not by a large amount, and it fails to
eliminate the affordability gap between London and the rest of England. Figure 7 shows the
resulting distribution of affordability,10 assuming both demand and supply effects. A significant aspect of this is the relatively more affordable housing in the Thames estuary, with
price–wage ratios of approximately 5. In contrast, Kensington and Chelsea has a ratio in
excess of 40, reflecting the special status of this area as a recipient of inward property
investment from overseas.
Our final simulation is summarised in Table 7. This is based on the suggestion by
Cheshire (2014) that ‘building on greenbelt land would only have to be very modest to
provide more than enough land for housing for generations to come: there is enough greenbelt land just within the confines of Greater London – 32,500 hectares – to build 1.6 million
houses at average densities’. We put this to the test by estimating what the effect of an extra
1.6 million houses would be, in this case allocating the housing to London boroughs on the

44

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

Table 6. The effects on prices and affordability in 2012 of a hypothetical 15% supply increase.

Both supply and demand effects
Greater London
England
Supply effects only
Greater London
England

Counterfactual price

Counterfactual affordability

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

416,061
226,694

356,791
203,724

11.07
7.42

8.80
6.87

408,307
225,012

348,371
202,706

10.85
7.37

8.60
6.81

Notes: with supply effects only, counterfactual price series were obtained on the assumption that there was no concomitant increase in the demand for housing, so that DIcs ¼ 0 across all districts and DSs ¼ 0 outside of Greater London.
Elsewhere, within Greater London, DSis ¼ 0:15Sis .

Figure 7. Affordability with 15% increased supply. (a) England; (b) South East England.
Key: vertical scale: number of districts; horizontal scale: price to annual wage ratio. Shades on the map and
the histogram correspond to the same affordability ratios.

Table 7. The effects on prices and affordability in 2012 of a hypothetical 1.6 million increase in supply.

Both supply and demand effects
Greater London
England
Supply effects only
Greater London
England

Counterfactual price

Counterfactual affordability

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

383,058
221,380

345,647
198,906

10.09
7.26

8.36
6.73

370,274
218,238

337,708
195,157

9.73
7.16

8.25
6.67

Notes: with supply effects only, counterfactual price series were obtained on the assumption that there was no concomitant increase in the demand for housing, so that DIcs ¼ 0 across all districts and DSs ¼ 0 outside of Greater London.
Elsewhere, within Greater London, we allocate the 1.6 million new housing units to London boroughs on the basis of their
share of greenbelt land.

Fingleton et al.

45

basis of their share of greenbelt land. This does have a major impact on affordability,
reducing it to a mean of 9.73 and a median value of 8.25. Mean prices would fall by
about £70,000. There is a marginal impact when we factor in the effect of increased
demand, which raises mean affordability to 10.09 and median affordability to 8.36. These
are both significantly below the 2012 mean and median values. Prices in this scenario are on
average about £55,000 below what they otherwise would be. It might be supposed that the
extra housing would be occupied by many commuters who currently travel in from outside
Greater London, but for simplicity we have not adjusted the levels of housing demand
downwards in out-of-London districts to allow for a potential exodus of former residents.
If this was a large effect, then the lower prices outside of London would to an extent spill
over into Greater London itself and could have a further dampening effect on the level of
prices and make housing more affordable. Likewise, if the new supply was largely filled by a
‘churning’ of Greater London residents, with Londoners moving out to former greenbelt
areas and releasing accommodation elsewhere in the capital, then extra demand in the
greenbelt could be to some extent compensated by the spillover effects of reduced
demand elsewhere in London. In reality, new housing could be filled by a mix of current
London residents, former commuters and migrants from outside the commuting belt or
from overseas. The scale of these effects on demand is difficult to assess, but our estimation
is that, at best, with zero impact from additional demand, mean affordability would be 9.73,
so even with this exceptionally large increase in the provision of housing services in Greater
London, affordability is still worse than in England as a whole.

Conclusions
Housing affordability has been a key political and economic concern in the UK for a
number of years. A lack of new housing supply in high-priced areas is generally mentioned
as the main cause of affordability problems. However, this study shows that simply increasing the stock of housing may not be sufficient for reducing prices as the corresponding
demand also needs to be considered. Unlike Glaeser et al. (2006), we show that even if
wages remain unchanged, new supply can have a much smaller effect on affordability than
anticipated. This is mainly due to changes to the size of the local labour force, a factor that
has been largely ignored in local and regional housing market forecasts.
Policies that reduce prices effectively are difficult to identify. In fact, even new supply
does not appear to be a good way to reduce house prices as the corresponding demand also
needs to be considered. Simulation results presented in this study show that improvements
in the affordability ratio resulting from new supply are likely to be relatively modest.
The key implication for policy makers is that they should carefully consider the interaction
between supply and demand when designing and implementing new housing policies.
It is also important to note the effect of commuting patterns on housing markets. In this
study, it is assumed that commuting costs will remain as in the Census year 2001. However,
they have risen inexorably, up 18% over the last three years. With growing transport costs,
it will become increasingly difficult to find substitutes for housing in a particular location.
This is likely to increase house prices and reduce affordability. In turn, this would make
long-distance commuting more attractive. If so, rising commuting costs are unlikely to
reduce demand for it. Instead, the cost of the substitute (housing close to a workplace) is
likely to grow accordingly. This shows that increasing commuting costs are likely to lead to
lower housing affordability, but not a reduced number of commuters. This has interesting
implications for urban sustainability as it suggests that the best way to reduce commuting
trips is to improve housing affordability. At the same time, it indicates that reducing

46

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

transportation costs could help reduce house prices. More research is needed to confirm this
logic, but it appears that commuting patterns are closely linked to housing affordability.
Overall, our empirical prediction shows that increasing housing supply appears to have
only a weak impact on affordability levels once the spatial dynamic effects of a supply shock
are taken into account. Future work might seek to explore this prediction with more extensive empirical data.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or
publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of
this article.

Notes
1. http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/housing/affordabilitytargetsimplications.
2. ‘ten years ago house prices were 3.5 times people’s annual salary [now] house prices are 6 times
annual salary’, speech delivered by the Rt. Hon. John Prescott (the then deputy prime minister) on
1 April 2005.
3. Divided by 1000.
4. Some Central London boroughs consistently attract foreign investment. In 2012, estate agents
Savills estimated the total value of housing stock in the London Boroughs of Westminster and
Kensington and Chelsea at £187bn, £11bn more than the value of the entire housing stock
of Wales.
5. Commuting flow data from the UK 2001 Census. A sample of the full table is given in
the Appendix.
6. The frequency in each row divided by the row total.
7. The outlier is the London Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
8. GMM estimation of a model with a spatial lag and spatially autoregressive random effects.
9. The specific locations are the 32 boroughs plus the City of London, collectively known as the 33
Boroughs of Greater London. We explore the consequences for residential property prices and
affordability of increasing the aggregate number of dwellings in these districts.
10. Affordability here is defined as simulated price, which is 2012 price plus net impact, divided by the
assumed annual wage.

References
Arellano M and Bond S (1991) Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and
an application to employment equations. The Review of Economic Studies 58(2): 277–297.
Aslund O and Rooth DO (2007) Do when and where matter? Initial labour market conditions and
immigrant earnings. The Economic Journal 117(518): 422–448.
Ball M, Meen G and Nygaard C (2010) Housing supply price elasticities revisited: Evidence from
international, national, local and company data. Journal of Housing Economics 19(4): 255–268.
Baltagi BH, Fingleton B and Pirotte A (2014) Estimating and forecasting with a dynamic spatial panel
data model. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 76: 112–136.
Baltagi BH, Fingleton B and Pirotte A (2018) A time–space dynamic panel data model with spatial
moving average errors. Regional Science and Urban Economics. Epub ahead of print 9 May 2018.
DOI: 10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2018.04.013.

Fingleton et al.

47

Barker K (2004) Review of Housing Supply: Delivering Stability – Securing Our Future Housing Needs,
Final Report. London: ODPM.
Bernstein J, Brocht C and Spade-Aguilar M (2000) How Much Is Enough? Basic Family Budgets for
Working Families. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Bissell D (2014) Transforming commuting mobilities: The memory of practice. Environment and
Planning A 46(8): 1946–1965.
Bond S (2002) Dynamic panel data models: A guide to micro data methods and practice. Portuguese
Economic Journal 1: 141–162.
Bramley G (1994) An affordability crisis in British housing: Dimensions, causes and policy impact.
Housing Studies 9(1): 103–124.
Chamberlain G (1984) Panel data. Handbook of Econometrics 2: 1247–1318.
Cheshire P (2014) Turning houses into gold: The failure of British planning. CentrePiece 19(1): 15–18.
Crook A, Burgess G, Dunning R, et al. (2010) The Incidence, Value and Delivery of Planning
Obligations in England in 2007–08. London: DCLG.
Debarsy N, Ertur C and LeSage JP (2012) Interpreting dynamic space–time panel data models.
Statistical Methodology 9: 158–171.
Elhorst JP (2001) Dynamic models in space and time. Geographical Analysis 33: 119–140.
Eliasson K, Lindgren U and Westerlund O (2003) Geographical labour mobility: Migration or commuting? Regional Studies 37(8): 827–837.
Fingleton B (2008) Housing supply, housing demand, and affordability. Urban Studies
45(8): 1545–1563.
Gallin J (2006) The long–run relationship between house prices and income: Evidence from local
housing markets. Real Estate Economics 34(3): 417–438.
Gibbons S, Mourato S and Resende GM (2014) The amenity value of English nature: A hedonic price
approach. Environmental and Resource Economics 57(2): 175–196.
Gibbons S, Overman HG and Resende G (2011) Real earnings disparities in Britain. LSE Working
Paper. London School of Economic, UK.
Glaeser EL and Gyourko J (2003) The impact of building restrictions on housing affordability. Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 9(2): 21–39.
Glaeser E, Gyourko J and Saks R (2006) Urban growth and housing supply. Journal of Economic
Geography 6(1): 71–89
Goodman AC (1988) An econometric model of housing price, permanent income, tenure choice, and
housing demand. Journal of Urban Economics 23(3): 327–353.
Gurran N and Whitehead C (2011) Planning and affordable housing in Australia and the UK: A
comparative perspective. Housing Studies 26(7–8): 1193–1214.
Haynes KE (1997) Labor markets and regional transportation improvements: The case of high-speed
trains – an introduction and review. The Annals of Regional Science 31(1): 57–76.
Hilber CA and Vermeulen W (2016) The impact of supply constraints on house prices in England. The
Economic Journal 126(591): 358–405.
Holly S, Pesaran MH and Yamagata T (2011) The spatial and temporal diffusion of house prices in the
UK. Journal of Urban Economics 69(1): 2–23.
Iacoviello M (2005) House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the business cycle.
American Economic Review 95(3): 739–764.
Kapoor M, Kelejian HH and Prucha IR (2007) Panel data models with spatially correlated error
components. Journal of Econometrics 140(1): 97–130.
Lambson VE, McQueen GR and Slade BA (2004) Do out-of-state buyers pay more for real estate? An
examination of anchoring-induced bias and search costs. Real Estate Economics 32(1): 85–126.
MacDonald R and Taylor MP (1993) Regional house prices in Britain: Long-run relationships and
short-run dynamics. Scottish Journal of Political Economy 40(1): 43–55.
Malpezzi S (1999) A simple error correction model of house prices. Journal of Housing Economics
8: 27–62.
Meen G (2002) The time-series behavior of house prices: A transatlantic divide? Journal of Housing
Economics 11(1): 1–23.

48

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

Meen G (2005) On the economics of the Barker review of housing supply. Housing Studies
20(6): 949–971.
Morrison N and Monk S (2006) Job–housing mismatch: Affordability crisis in Surrey, South East
England. Environment and Planning A 38(6): 1115–1130.
Mulalic I, Van Ommeren JN and Pilegaard N (2014) Wages and commuting: Quasi-natural experiments’ evidence from firms that relocate. The Economic Journal 124(579): 1086–1105.
Mutl J (2006) Dynamic panel data models with spatially correlated disturbances. PhD Thesis,
University of Maryland, College Park, USA.
Nelson AC, Pendall R, Dawkins CJ, et al. (2002) The link between growth management and housing
affordability: The academic evidence. Discussion Paper. Brookings Institution Center on Urban
and Metropolitan Policy, USA.
Ortalo-Magne F and Rady S (2006) Housing market dynamics: On the contribution of income shocks
and credit constraints. The Review of Economic Studies 73(2): 459–485.
Parent O and LeSage JP (2011) A space–time filter for panel data models containing random effects.
Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 55: 475–490.
Parent O and LeSage JP (2012) Spatial dynamic panel data models with random effects. Regional
Science & Urban Economics 42: 727–738.
Roback J (1982) Wages, rents, and the quality of life. Journal of Political Economy 90(4): 1257–1278.
Rosen S (1979) Wage-based indexes of urban quality of life. In: Mieszkowski P and Straszheim M
(eds) Current Issues in Urban Economics. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press,
pp.74–104.
Sa F (2015) Immigration and house prices in the UK. The Economic Journal 125(587): 1393–1424.
Sevestre P and Trognon A (1996) Dynamic linear models. In: Matyas L and Sevestre P (eds) The
Econometrics of Panel Data. Dordrecht: Springer, pp.120–144.
Stone ME (2006) What is housing affordability? The case for the residual income approach. Housing
Policy Debate 17(1): 151–184.
Sultana S (2002) Job/housing imbalance and commuting time in the Atlanta metropolitan area:
Exploration of causes of longer commuting time. Urban Geography 23(8): 728–749.
Szumilo N, Laszkiewicz E and Fuerst F (2017) The spatial impact of employment centres on housing
markets. Spatial Economic Analysis 12: 472–491.
Tse CY and Chan AW (2003) Estimating the commuting cost and commuting time property price
gradients. Regional Science and Urban Economics 33(6): 745–767.
Weiner D and Fuerst F (2017) The dynamics of house prices in Israel and the effect of the investor’s
fear gauge. Journal of Housing Research 26(1): 95–117.
White M and Allmendinger P (2003) Land-use planning and the housing market: A comparative
review of the UK and the USA. Urban Studies 40(5–6): 953–972.
Whitehead CME. (2007) Planning policies and affordable housing: England as a successful case study?
Housing Studies 22(1): 25–44.

Fingleton et al.

49

Appendix A
Table A1. Variables used in the study.
Model
I
E
w
p
i
t
~
C

WN
S
B
F
x; 1
c
q1
b1
b2
b3
b4
h
q2
r2l
r2
l
t

Income within commuting distance
The number of workers
Average wages
Average house price
District
Time period (year)
N N matrix in which row i (i ¼ 1,. . .,N) contains the proportions
of commuters travelling from district i to work in each of the
N districts
N  N matrix based on commuting frequencies, with zeros on
main diagonal, and row normalised so that rows sum to 1.0
Stock of dwellings
Bank of England interest rate
FTSE ALL SHARES index
Random disturbances of demand and supply equations
Parameters of the dynamic spatial panel specification
Coefficient of the temporal lag of price
Coefficient of the spatial lag of prices
Coefficient of income
Coefficient of dwelling stock
Interest rate coefficient
Share index coefficient
Coefficient of the spatial lag of the temporal lag of price
Coefficient of the autoregressive spatial error process
Variance of the time-invariant error component
Variance of the transient random disturbance
Time-invariant error component accounting for unobserved
sources of heterogeneity across districts
Transient error component accounting for unobserved spatial and
temporal effects

Note: the table only includes variables that the paper uses without definition. The rest are defined in the main body as they
are introduced.

50

EPA: Economy and Space 51(1)

Appendix B
Sample of the N N (N ¼ 353) commuting matrix constructed using the 2001 Census:
UK travel flows at local authority levels.

Table B1. A sample of the matrix of travel flows between districts.

Luton
Mid-Bedfordshire
Bedford
South Bedfordshire
Bracknell Forest

Luton

MidBedfordshire

Bedford

South
Bedfordshire

Bracknell
Forest

54,399
3961
1888
9446
12

1071
29,925
4458
987
0

865
5675
50,165
716
8

6876
1662
599
27,556
6

28
30
17
43
30,840

~ corresponding to districts listed in Table B1: the proportions of commuters travelling
Table B2. Matrix C
from district i to work in each of the N districts
~¼
C
0.6624
0.0130
0.0105
0.0837
0.0003
0.0623
0.4706
0.0892
0.0261
0.0005
0.0269
0.0634
0.7137
0.0085
0.0002
0.1654
0.0173
0.0125
0.4824
0.0008
0.0002
0.0000
0.0001
0.0001
0.5156

~ but the leading diagonal cells
Table B3. Matrix W corresponding to districts listed in Table B1: same as C
are set to zero prior to standardisation (the frequency in each row divided by the row total).
W¼

0.0000
0.1176
0.0938
0.3195
0.0004

0.0386
0.0000
0.2215
0.0334
0.0000

0.0312
0.1686
0.0000
0.0242
0.0003

0.2480
0.0494
0.0298
0.0000
0.0002

0.0010
0.0009
0.0008
0.0015
0.0000

